---
title: "The Magic SysRq Key"
date: <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">&lt;2019-03-19 Tue&gt;</span></span>
layout: post
categories:
tags:
---
Here's the layout of the bottom row of my laptop's keyboard:

{% highlight nil %}
+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------------------+-----+-----+-----+
|     |     |     |     |                   |     |     |     |
|Fn   |Ctrl |Win  |Alt  |       Space       |Alt  |PrtSc|Ctrl | [arrows]
+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------------------+-----+-----+-----+
{% endhighlight %}

The **Control key** is used for the **common standard keyboard shortcuts** (`Ctrl-a` to select all, `Ctrl-v` to paste, etc), but **Emacs** makes especially heavy use of it (`Ctrl-x` and `Ctrl-c` for prefix keys, `Ctrl-g` to quit, etc). With my hands on the home row, running those commands with that keyboard requires **extending my pinkies out and back**. **Ouch!**

Besides being painful, the arrangement of those modifier keys also leads to constantly tripping over `PrtSc` and **capturing a screenshot**. Why is the Print Screen key easier to reach than the Control key? Who needs such quick, convenient access to screenshots? I don't know. What I do know is that Emacs also has a bunch of keybindings that use the control and alt keys together, e.g. `Ctrl-Alt-f`<sup><a id="fnr.1" class="footref" href="#fn.1">1</a></sup> for `forward-sexp`, and that trying to hit both of those modifier keys at the same time invariably leads to **littering my desktop with screenshots**.

In **Linux**, the solution to a **shitty keyboard layout** is `xmodmap`. I don't understand all the intricacies involved, but I have a file called `xmodmap-print` that looks like this<sup><a id="fnr.2" class="footref" href="#fn.2">2</a></sup>:

{% highlight nil %}
clear lock
clear control
clear mod1
clear mod4

! ! is for comments, in this case showing the keys' original values

! keycode  64 = Alt_L Meta_L Alt_L Meta_L
keycode 64 = Control_L
! keycode 133 = Super_L NoSymbol Super_L
keycode 133 = Alt_L
! keycode  37 = Control_L NoSymbol Control_L
keycode 37 = Super_L

! keycode 108 = Alt_R Meta_R Alt_R Meta_R
keycode 108 = Control_R
! keycode 107 = Print Sys_Req Print Sys_Req
keycode 107 = Alt_R
! keycode 105 = Control_R NoSymbol Control_R
keycode 105 = Super_R

add control = Control_L Control_R Caps_Lock
add mod1 = Alt_L Alt_R
add mod4 = Super_L Super_R
{% endhighlight %}

Running `xmodmap xmodmap-print` shuffles my modiers into a much more pleasant arrangment:

{% highlight nil %}
+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------------------+-----+-----+-----+
|     |     |     |     |                   |     |     |     |
|Fn   |Win  |Alt  |Ctrl |       Space       |Ctrl |Alt  |Win  | [arrows]
+-----+-----+-----+-----+-------------------+-----+-----+-----+
{% endhighlight %}

-   Control keys are placed on either side of the space bar, where I can bang on them with my **thumbs** instead of my pinkies.

-   Control and Alt keys are next to each other, and I can again use my thumbs to bash both of them at the same time (in practice, I only use my right thumb for this).

-   `PrtSc` goes in the trash, and is replaced with another Windows / Super key. No more unwanted screenshots for me!

-   `CapsLock` also goes in the trash, and is replaced with another Control key. You can never have too many modifiers, and `CapsLock` is a dumbass key anyway.

Keyboard problem solved!? Well, not quite. Soon after I developed this keyboard setup, my computer started **rebooting without warning**. I don't mean freezing or hibernating or anything like that, I mean shutting clean off and then restarting. No messages, no blue screen, nothing.

Needless to say, that's a frustrating sort of issue to debug. I don't remember how, but eventually I discovered that the culprit was something called the **magic `SysRq` key**.

To explain what this thing does, I'm going to try and describe what I think is happening when keystrokes are processed. I don't know if my mental model is entirely accurate, but it seems to match the observed behavior. My terminology is definitely not right. (*Please send corrections!*)

1.  There's me, the **user**, and whatever **application** I'm using &#x2013; editor, browser, whatever. The user application is the last thing to receive keystrokes.

2.  Prior to the application, keystrokes are processed by the **desktop / window environment**. I don't know exactly what this is called, but on Ubuntu it's Gnome or Unity or whatever. Or X? I'm not sure. In any case, something gets to handle keystrokes before the application, and if it does, the application doesn't get them. For example, Emacs binds the function `down-list` to `Ctrl-Alt-d`. But on **Ubuntu 18**, that same keybinding is used to switch to the desktop. If the keystroke is something that the window system thinks it should handle, it will, and it won't pass it along to the application afterwards. Because I've been too lazy to fix this, I cannot use `Ctrl-Alt-d` in Emacs.

3.  Prior even to the desktop / window system is the **kernel**. The kernel talks directly to the **hardware**, and therefore has **first dibs** on all keystrokes. Again, any keystrokes it handles will not get passed along downstream.

So we have the application, the desktop, and the kernel. It's obvious what the first two can do with keystrokes, as they cover everything that most users want to do with their computers. The list of things the kernel can do with keystrokes, on the other hand, is rather short, and it includes things like terminating processes and displaying register and memory information. In particular, there are also keystrokes to **shut off and reboot the system**. The latter is bound to the keystroke `Alt-SysRq-b`.

I still haven't said where the `SysRq` key actually is. If you look at my keyboard, you won't find it, but on older keyboards it can sometimes be found  up in the corner among those weird keys that you've always wondered about but never used (*Scroll Lock*?). A typical `SysRq` key looks something like this:

{% highlight nil %}
+-------+
| PrtSc |
| ----- |
| SysRq |
+-------+
{% endhighlight %}

According to the labeling there, `PrtSc` and `SysRq` inhabit the same key. They inhabit the same key on my keyboard too, but it isn't labeled. If you take another look at the first keyboard diagram above, you'll notice that `Alt` and `PrtSc` are right next to each other, and it is thus easy to hit them at the same time, potentially triggering a kernel command.

But I remapped my keys, so that shouldn't be a problem, right? **Wrong**. `xmodmap` belongs to the window manager, and that doesn't handle keystrokes until after the kernel has already passed on them. So when I hit what *to me* should be `Ctrl-Alt-b` to run Emacs's `backward-sexp` command, the kernel sees that as `Alt-SysRq-b` before the `xmodmap` has had a chance to rebind it and reboots the system.

The kernel can be warded off from incoming keystrokes with the incantation

{% highlight shell %}
sysctl -w kernel.sysrq=0
{% endhighlight %}

This **disables all kernel keyboard commands** by writing `0` into the file `/proc/sys/kernel/sysrq`. It would be nice to be able to keep kernel commands, but just rebind them to other keys. Is that possible? I don't know.


# Update

Some reader ideas:

-   **Trevor Saunders** suggests that [`loadkeys`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/loadkeys.1.html) and [`dumpkeys`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/dumpkeys.1.html) might be able to remap keys at the kernel level. I haven't been able to figure these out yet.
-   **[Greg Hendershott](https://www.greghendershott.com/)** points out the following from the [Wikipedia SysRq page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_SysRq_key#Configuration): *On Ubuntu [the number written to `/proc/sys/kernel/sysrq` ] is set at boot time to the value defined in `/etc/sysctl.d/10-magic-sysrq.conf`.* I'd like to say that that was added after I wrote this post, but it fact it was added [almost exactly one year ago today](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Magic_SysRq_key&diff=835748783&oldid=829268310) <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">&lt;2019-04-12 Fri&gt;</span></span>, and I just missed it. Anyway, it works, and I no longer have to run that `sysctl` command every time I turn on my computer.

# Footnotes

<sup><a id="fn.1" href="#fnr.1">1</a></sup> Generally speaking Emacs refers to the Alt key as the *Meta* key. Emacs also uses a compact notation for keybindings: `C-M-f` for `Ctrl-Meta-f`.

<sup><a id="fn.2" href="#fnr.2">2</a></sup> A program called `xev` displays information about key codes.
